Ukrainian forces struck oil facilities in Russia and occupied Ukraine, Ukrainian and Russian officials said Monday, as part of their campaign to make Moscow pay an economic cost for the war.
Separately, Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has confirmed that Roman Abramovich acted as a go-between for messages between Kyiv and Moscow. Zelenskyy told Sky News that the former owner of Premier League team Chelsea traveled to Kyiv with a message from Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Zelenskyy said Abramovich brought the message that the Russians “want to understand what we are ready to do,” and had offered to take a reply to Putin.
Meanwhile, the European Union’s foreign policy chief said a new proposed round of sanctions against Russia includes 80 listings targeting Russia’s “military industrial complex, human rights violators and propagandists.”
Kaja Kallas told a news conference after a meeting of EU defense ministers Monday that Western sanctions have already cost Moscow an estimated $1.2 to 1.5 trillion.
Russia’s Defense Ministry said its forces shot down 310 Ukrainian drones overnight into Monday, including over the Moscow region, western and southwestern Russia, Russian-occupied Crimea and the Black and Azov seas.
Russia targeted Ukraine with 155 drones, of which Ukrainian air defenses shot down or suppressed 124, according to its air force.
Ukraine’s General Staff said Ukrainian forces had struck Russia’s Krasnodar Krai region overnight, hitting the Grushovaya oil transshipment base near Novorossiysk. The complex is one of the largest transshipment hubs in southern Russia for oil and petroleum products.
Russian regional authorities confirmed a Ukrainian drone sparked a fire at the facility, adding that there were no casualties. While they did not comment on the extent of damage, they said 130 rescue workers were involved in putting out the blaze.
Asked whether the Kremlin is worried about the fuel crisis in Crimea, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said the Energy Ministry and other agencies are working on a set of measures to respond to the situation.
“There are indeed certain problems at the moment,” Peskov said. “Measures are being taken.”
The Krasny Yar “linear production and dispatching station” in the Volgograd region was also hit, the General Staff said. A fire broke out at the site, according to the statement. Russian Gov. Andrei Bocharov didn’t specify what the facility produces, but said there were no injuries.
Ukraine also carried out strikes overnight in the Semykolodezkaya oil base in the Russian-occupied Crimean Peninsula on Sunday night, sparking a fire at the facility. The base is used to store fuel reserves supplying the Russian military, according to the statement posted on Telegram.
Ukrainian forces also struck an oil depot near Feodosia in Crimea, the General Staff said.
Zelenskyy said his message was that he would meet Putin “any time” in any location other than Russia or Belarus, and either bilaterally or with U.S. President Donald Trump and European leaders.
But he said Ukraine would not surrender the Donbas region, currently part-occupied by Russia.
“It was the key message. I said we will not leave and we will not go out from our territory,” Zelenskyy told Sky News.
Putin said last week that a Russian businessman, who he didn’t identify, traveled to Kyiv last month and met with Zelenskyy to hear his offer of a personal meeting. The Russian leader rejected the idea of a meeting, saying he saw no point in it.
Two people were killed and at least 18 injured, including four children aged 5, 10, 13 and 12, by a Russian drone attack in the central Zaporizhzhia region that damaged residential buildings and vehicles and destroyed market kiosks, said the regional military administration head, Ivan Fedorov.
In Nikopol. a Russian attack killed a 49-year-old woman and injured four other people, according to the State Emergency Service.
The service also reported that four people were injured in the Dnipropetrovsk region when strikes hit residential buildings. In Odesa, three people were wounded after a Russian drone struck a public transport stop.
Russian drone strikes overnight also injured civilians and damaged buildings and businesses in the Kharkiv, Odesa and Chernihiv regions, regional authorities said.
Meanwhile, a Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train traveling from Moscow to Simferopol in occupied Crimea, injuring the driver and killing the driver’s assistant, Kremlin-installed regional leader Sergei Aksyonov reported early Monday.
Akysyonov added that no passengers were hurt. But all passenger train traffic in Crimea was halted following the attack, with passengers evacuated and replacement buses provided, Russian operator Grand Service Express reported on Telegram that same morning.
The war needs to end justly with a simple stop in the aggressor's pushing.
By heck! Putin is going to kick off for this, make no mistake.
I’m started wondering if theve both turned potty due to their recent behaviour
Zelenskyy said Abramovich brought the message that the Russians “want to understand what we are ready to do,” and had offered to take a reply to Putin.
Interesting. Despite Putin rejecting Zelensky's public offer of bilateral talks it seems that behind the scenes Putin is starting to come around to the idea.
Or he could just be playing for time until Trump refocuses on the conflict.
By heck! Putin is going to kick off for this, make no mistake.
No, he isn't. He's impotent. He can only do what he's been doing for years: attacks on civilians on Kyiv.
He doesn't have a strategy to win on the battlefield, so try and make civilians lives worse.
I’m started wondering if theve both turned potty due to their recent behaviour
Kyiv have been striking oil sites in Russia and Crimea for over a year. Have you just noticed?
Or he could just be playing for time until Trump refocuses on the conflict.
I think that Putin's last hope, as he sees it, is for Trump to give him something to turn this around.
Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train
Putin needs to talk to Zelenskyy if he wants some kind of out from his disastrous war of choice in order to avoid a palace coup by the elites.
His situation is worsening by the day. His meat grinder assaults have completely stalled; he is facing hugely-effective Ukrainian drones both on and miles behind the battlefield; a united, Orban-less Europe is providing weapons and funding; and his ally Trump is busy with his own disastrous war of choice in Iran, so not helping him.
Coupled with Russia's own economic, industrial, and demographic problems, Putin's prospects are bleak.
..Roman Abramovich acted as a go-between for messages between Kyiv and Moscow. Zelenskyy told Sky News that the former owner of Premier League team Chelsea traveled to Kyiv with a message from Russian President Vladimir Putin. Zelenskyy said Abramovich brought the message that the Russians “want to understand what we are ready to do,”..
Good to see steps towards peace being taken. Every step counts.
or at east prevailing...somebody tell me...
“There are indeed certain problems at the moment,” Peskov said.
Bit of a master of understatement he is.
Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train ....was that a train full of civilians?
You really shouldn be talking about that too much, it will punch holes in the UA is not hitting civilian targets narrative here.
..Roman Abramovich acted as a go-between for messages between Kyiv and Moscow. Zelenskyy told Sky News that the former owner of Premier League team Chelsea traveled to Kyiv with a message from Russian President Vladimir Putin. Zelenskyy said Abramovich brought the message that the Russians “want to understand what we are ready to do,”..
Good to see steps towards peace being taken. Every step counts.
Zelensky told them that they will not give up any of the remaining Donbas and that whatever happened in Anchorage is meaningless because it didn't involve Ukraine.
But he is ready to meet, as he has always said. But not in Moscow or in Minsk.
by my humble opinion Kiev cant win over Russia by desperate attacks on civilian trains...
still dunno if Kiev is winning and prevailing.maybe in hearts of some heroi here ?
reality saying that Kiev have zero chance to win-even with all western financial and media support.
by my humble opinion Kiev cant win over Russia by desperate attacks on civilian trains...
By this humble logic, Russia certainly can’t win.
I think you might win something after you get banned a few more times. Maybe a persistence badge.
Our Putinists go through a lot of accounts and coping methods on here.
Kiev cant win over Russia by desperate attacks on civilian trains…
it’s strategic when Moscow does it, but it’s desperate when Kiev (sic) does it.
Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train ....was that a train full of civilians?
You really shouldn be talking about that too much, it will punch holes in the UA is not hitting civilian targets narrative here.
Russia targets civilians, Ukraine does not.
There will never be room for diplomacy or any real prospect of peace so long as Putin remains at the helm of Russia. The past four years - defined exclusively by the military path - have made one thing unequivocally clear: he is the wrong man to steer the country toward a settlement.
Russia targets civilians, Ukraine does not.
yet- not what the article says. Is the article lying?
“a Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train”
Russia targets civilians, Ukraine does not.
yet- not what the article says. Is the article lying?
“a Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train”
...Kremlin-installed regional leader Sergei Aksyonov reported early Monday.
If Russia allows an independent investigation, we may get to the truth of the matter.
"Russia targets civilians, Ukraine does not."
You keep repeating that but it's clearly false. Both sides do. The world needs Trump to refocus on Ukraine peace talks asap.
Today's article - ... a Ukrainian drone overnight struck a passenger train traveling from Moscow to Simferopol in occupied Crimea, injuring the driver and killing the driver’s assistant,
Last week -Ukrainian drone struck a passenger bus traveling between Moscow and Crimea on June 3, 2026. The attack resulted in the deaths of eight civilians and left at least 10 others injured when the long-distance vehicle was hit during a scheduled passenger stop in the town of Yenakiieve, located within the Russian-controlled Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine.
Couple of weeks ago - A total of 21 people were killed and at least 42 to 63 others were injured in the Ukraine drone drone attack on the Starobilsk pedagogical college dormitory building. Most casualties were teenage girls studying to become teachers.
There will never be room for diplomacy or any real prospect of peace so long as Putin remains at the helm of Russia.
Hard to see Putin going anywere anytime soon.
"Russia targets civilians, Ukraine does not."
You keep repeating that but it's clearly false.
The world needs Trump to refocus on Ukraine peace talks asap.
Nobody needs Trump. He has no idea what he is doing anymore.
*Ukraine’s General Staff** said Ukrainian forces had struck Russia’s Krasnodar Krai region overnight, hitting the Grushovaya oil transshipment base near Novorossiysk.*
So does this claim need an “investigation” too?
A guy now wants “investigations” but only when his side targets civilians over and over despite his incessant denials of fact,
Ukraine allows investigations of civilian strikes by Russian drones and missiles in Ukrainian territory to determine facts.
So does this claim need an “investigation” too?
Why would it? Russians confirmed it and confirmed no casualties?
*Ukraine’s General Staff* said Ukrainian forces had struck Russia’s Krasnodar Krai region overnight, hitting the Grushovaya oil transshipment base near Novorossiysk.
So does this claim need an “investigation” too?
A mix of what's trending on our other sites